---
layout: post
title: "Sudoku Compression"
description: "A final project for an information theory class"
summary: "Algorithms"
tags: [information-theory, programming]
---

The other day I stumbled upon a project from my senior year of high school which I thought would be fun to describe here:

Alice and Bob are playing a game. Alice has a completed Sudoku puzzle which Bob cannot see. Bob's goal is to determine the contents of the grid using as few yes-no questions as possible. Alice will respond truthfully to all of the questions **or** all but one question, whichever she desires. What is Bob's optimal strategy?

## Establishing a Theoretical Lower Bound

With yes-no questions, the best we can hope to do is use the answer to eliminate half the possibilities under consideration. Assuming a uniform distribution over the Sudoku grids, the minimum number of questions would be $\lceil \log_2 N \rceil$ for $N$ the number of possible Sudoku grids.

A quick look at the Wikipedia article on [the mathematics of Sudoku](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematics_of_Sudoku#Enumerating_all_possible_Sudoku_solutions) reveals that there are $6.67 \times 10^{21}$
possible grids. Thus, we can say that no algorithm can do better than 73 questions.

## A Theoretically Optimal Algorithm

Huffman coding is optimal when we know the probabilities of inputs, which in this case is uniform. If you want a look at an implementation of Huffman coding, take a [look here](https://github.com/ashwinreddy/huffman). The algorithm in this context would be the following:

1. Define an _indexing function_ $f: X \to \mathbb{N}$ for $X$, the random variable representing Sudoku grids, that is bijective.
2. Combine symbols $f(x_1)$ and $f(x_2)$ for $x_1$ and $x_2$ the least likely grids. Remove symbols $x_1$ and $x_2$ and insert the new composite symbol with probability $\Pr(X=x_1)+\Pr(X=x_2)$.
3. Repeat step 2 until there is one composite symbol.

If we have a suitable indexing function, here's how we'd solve the challenge:

1. Bob would ask Alice to encode her grid. Say her result is $g$.
2. Bob would ask Alice if $g$ is greater than the median grid symbol.

This algorithm is not particularly elegant because Alice must calculate $g=f(x)$ for her grid $x$.

## Reducing Scope

What we would like is to generate questions _about_ the board that evenly bifurcate the set of possible grids (e.g. when no information is known about the board, the question "does the first cell have a value between 1 and 5"). It takes around $\log_2 9$ questions to figure out what the first cell is. Note however that when we go to find out the value of the second cell, there are only 8 options by the rules of Sudoku. At that point, there are only $\log_2 8 = 3$ questions to ask.

## Gradual Elimination Algorithm

Here's a simple sketch of an algorithm (probably not a particularly efficient one):

Initialize a $9 \times 9 \times 9$ array `grid` that keeps track of all viable cell possibilities for each cell. To begin with for all $i$ and $j$, `grid[i][j]` will be a 9-long list of 1s, indicating that any cell can be any value.

We use binary search on each cell to figure out its value. These are yes-no questions because they are always in the format "Is the value in cell $(i, j) > k$ ?" If the answer is no, we eliminate that possibility on the board. We do this by switching `grid[i][j][k]=0` because we know that the value at $(i, j)$ cannot be $k$. In this way, we can be efficient at the per-cell level by only querying over possible options. When we determine a cell's value, we eliminate that possibility from its neighbors (cells in the same row, column, or subgrid).

Intuitively, our algorithm is efficient at asking about each cell, so suboptimality is mostly a result of the order of asking about cells. Unfortunately, it's not really clear what the right order is.

## Checkpoints

With the gradual elimination algorithm in mind, we can start to think about how to deal with the lie. Again, we can use a relatively simple algorithm at the expense of some efficiency. We call this algorithm checkpointing.

- Pick a value $n_{cf}$, which stands for checkpointing frequency. When $n_{cf}$ cells are determined, we ask Alice whether the portion of the grid we've solved matches her grid.
- Say we have asked $q$ questions so far. If a lie occured between questions $q$ and $q-n_{cf}$, we will catch it in this way. We simply repeat the last $n_{cf}$ questions.
- However, Alice can lie on the checkpointing question. This is actually probably okay, as we will catch this lie on the next checkpoint. For the sake of completeness, we'll go over a quick fix to this issue:
- Ask whether Alice lied on the last question. If $c$ is the answer to the first question and $\ell$ is the answer to the second, then $c \oplus \ell$ is the true answer, where $\oplus$ is the XOR operator.

Since we've introduced this parameter $n_{cf}$, the question of its optimal value naturally arises. A high frequency will catch the lie if it happens early but will waste questions if it happens later on or not at all. A low frequency will be more efficient. However, if a lie happens late in the game, it puts many of the values of cells back into question. We just ended up using a value of 4.

## Tree-Based Counting

While experimenting with our algorithm, we developed some code to count solutions in a tree. Every edge represents a decision for a value that can be assigned to a cell. Each node is a grid configuration. Counting leaf nodes is therefore counting solutions. In testing (not very rigorously, I may add), we found that the tree structure converged on a solution at the same time as the main algorithm.

## Some Simple Optimizations

Here are a couple ways of making the algorithm converge a little more quickly:

- **Shortcircuiting**: Say we're are interested in cell $(i, j)$. We ask Alice about this cell, and she lies. Of course, we don't know this quite yet. We do the appropriate computations on cell $(i, j)$ and its neighbors. In some cases, this computation results in there being 0 possibilities for a neighbor. Since this situation can never happen in actual Sudoku, we simply rewind to the last checkpoint.

- **Double clearing**: Sometimes cell $(i, j)$ is assigned a value and its neighbor cell B ends up with only one possibility. Without double clearing, the program will not remove cell B's value as a possibility for its neighbors. To double clear, the program should iterate through all cells with only one value and remove that value from its neighbor.

## Conclusion

In practice, the algorithm's average number of questions asked is in the high 70s when we assume no lying. With lies, the average is in the 90s. [Here](https://github.com/ashwinreddy/info-theory-sudoku) is the code we used if you're interested.

We used this program to compete with other students' ideas. I believe the winning idea was to do binary search on the individual rows of the grid. In any case, it was a lot of fun to come up with this algorithm on our own!

_Update (23 July 2020): Check out [this](https://rakhman.info/blog/solving-sudoku-with-graph-theory/) article on a similar topic_
