---
title: 'Eschew "Obvious"'
---

The word "obvious" is the game over screen for curiosity, playfulness, and understanding. I think one could go their entire life without using the word; I will challenge myself to do so. 

To call something obvious is to signal to your audience that both of you need not question the point further because it is self-evident. This situation commonly arises in, say, a long mathematical proof, but you can always substitute the word "obvious" for "clear" or some alternative with a less dismissive connotation.

When learning a new subject for the first time, we often miss out on what is deemed "obvious" through no real fault of our own. There may be a lot of new information to take in. To call a point obvious is simply to rub it in for the novice that they haven't made some observation. Is there anything more frustrating than being told that you're not seeing something when you're still trying to understand what it _is_ that you're seeing?

The goal of learning is to develop perspective and intuition, and beginners haven't yet learned to look at the right things, the important things. Even if something is obvious, there is no harm in briefly explaining what or why it is. If it really is as clear as the word "obvious" indicates the author thinks it is, a short clarification should not detract significantly from the point being made.

More crucially, accepting statements without questioning them limits creativity. Take a statement many would call obvious: $2+2=4$. How could it not be so? But modular arithmetic is an important, practical, and rich concept in mathematics where it might indeed be possible that $2+2 \equiv 1$. It is worth throwing out the word "obvious" so that every assumption we make can be challenged.
