---
layout: post
title: "Books: A 2020 Reflection"
summary: "Books I read in 2020"
tags: [reading, books]
---

## Prologue

Reading fiction was one of the many joys of my youth. Unfortunately, the tedium of middle school essay-writing stole my beloved pastime from me, and I forgot how to read. You might think I'm joking, but I've always lagged in the reading comprehension section of standardized tests, and my growing distaste for reading certainly wasn't helping. I only read for literature and history classes, and even then I would use online summaries if I didn't have time.

But I rekindled my old flame at the start of this year when I read _When Breath Becomes Air_, which I was gifted for my graduation. That book started the slippery slope that has resulted in me staying up late reading when maybe I should be doing work.

I bought a Kindle as well to help lubricate the process of getting a book into my hand. I find the convenience of synchronization between my laptop, phone, tablet, and Kindle very convenient. There's almost zero friction between a free moment and digging into the next chapter. Perhaps I will buy physical copies of cherished books, but I'll be sticking to digital for the foreseeable future.

I'll now briefly sketch the books I read this year.

## Non-Fiction

I find it incredibly easy to read and rave about fiction, so one of my goals is trying to read more non-fiction. Luckily, I did a fair amount this year.

* _When Breath Becomes Air_ was written by Dr. Paul Kalanithi when he found out that he had lung cancer. He discusses his early life and how he became a doctor. Fundamentally, I think it's a reflection about what it's like as a doctor to see people dying and what it means to understand one's own mortality with that in mind. It's poignant and is the kind of book that could kickstart your own reading journey.
* _Blitzed: Drugs in the Third Reich_, which I took on recommendation from Prof. David Presti, who teaches Drugs and the Brain at Berkeley. It journals the use of amphetamines by the Nazi army during their Blitzkrieg as well as Hitler's own personal drug use, brought forth by his personal doctor. A fascinating but little known story about drugs as a military tactic and the quintessential dictator who engaged with them unwittingly.
*  _The Moral Landscape_ made an interesting case for how we might build morality on the basis of science; I'm unsure to what extent I agree with its claims, but its proposals are worth taking seriously. 
* _Longitude: The True Story of a Lone Genius Who Solved the Greatest Scientific Problem of His Time_, which chronicles John Harrison's development of accurate watches that helped sailors navigate. I initially picked it up because I find watches fascinating, but this book has given me an even greater appreciation for horology. It's a riveting story that will satisfy anyone with an interest in technology and/or history.
* Schrodinger's _What is Life?_, a series of lectures wherein Schrodinger describes the existence of DNA, though it hadn't been discovered yet, using first principles physics. I comprehended the main ideas easily, but I think I will need to return to it because it holds gems of ideas that need to be re-examined.
* _How to Read a Book_ sounds like a joke, but I waited until I had a solid reading streak before picking it up. The book proposes a framework for thinking about reading that I find very useful -- in fact, I plan on making a blog post to flesh out my ideas on the subject. Worth a read if you enjoy reading but are looking for some theoretical backbone to guide your intellectual journeys.

Now, we come to the fun stuff -- fiction, which always seems to slip itself comfortably in my hands.

## Tales of Good & Evil

* _The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde_ loses some of its punch since modern readers already know the twist and the book's Victorian sensibilities refuse to give you the details on what exactly makes Hyde so evil. Nonetheless, the story is excellently told.
* _The Picture of Dorian Gray_ feels like it shares the same heart as the above, but is entirely different in execution, focusing on aesthetics and moral beauty, if such a term exists. Wilde's witty aphorisms often went over my head, but their paradoxical nature invites thoughtful analysis of the book. Certainly a text I will have to revisit.
* _A Clockwork Orange_ plays with language in a delightful way and tells a horrifying story that confuses you to the point where you don't know if you want to put the book down or keep reading. It asks interesting questions, but the extended ending spoils the fun of having the reader think about what happens to Alex.


## Comics

* _Marvel 1602_ puts your favorite Marvel superheroes in 1602 Europe. It's a fun ride.
* _Spider-Man: Life Story_ puts a spin on the comic book logic of having a character perpetually the same age. What if Spider-Man actually aged like a normal person? 

## The Fantastical

* _Mistborn: The Final Empire_ has an incredibly developed magic system and a compelling plot. I definitely had a strong book hangover from this one.
* _Mistborn: The Well of Ascension_ unfortunately didn't quite live up to the first in the trilogy. It definitely had good parts, but its premise didn't feel as dynamic and exciting as the first.
* _The Way of Kings_ defies a simple explanation, but I found myself hooked on every page despite not a lot actually going on. Its high fantasy format with a prologue, parts, and interludes invites an immersion into a world that I totally sunk my teeth into. As the first book in a long series, it does the heavy lifting of building the world, so not as much time is left for the more exciting things. One pro is that Sanderson's writing is orders of magnitude more polished now, so the prose is smooth and fun to read.
* _Words of Radiance_ tops the first book in every possible way. It's a frighteningly fun novel that takes the characters in all sorts of directions that you didn't even know you wanted to see.
* _Treasure Island_ was okay. I was expecting more high sea adventure, but it mostly felt like we were just following this Jim kid around while he was doing random things. Perhaps it's because we're all too familiar with the tropes, but I was expecting more from this one.

## "Literature"

* _The Death of Ivan Ilyich_ is a short novella that walks through the life of its titular character as you see the kind of life he's developed for himself and a long, drawn out death that puts it all in a new light. 
* _The Count of Monte Cristo_ is my favorite book yet. I really don't want to say anything so that you can experience it all for yourself.


## Reflections

This year, I endeavored to make reading a habit, and though I did not read uniformly over the year (indeed, at some points I would read every day and others not at all),  I consider my progress a great success. I can say that I identify as a reader. In retrospect, I may deem 2020 my year of reading. However, I have much to discover in 2021!
