---
title: "Lie Theory for Sophomores - Part 1"
layout: post
published: true
tags: [math]
---

The goal of this series will be to explain some basic ideas in [Lie Theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lie_theory) (pronounced _Lee_ as in Robert E. Lee) in such a way that someone with math background between high school sophomore year and college sophomore year could understand without too much difficulty.[^maturity] The word _sophomore_ means wise fool, and in that spirit, we will try to gain lots of understanding by working through some seemingly simple problems.

[^maturity]: In short, the mathematically immature are welcome.

## $\mathbb{C}$omplex $\mathbb{C}$omputations

You've just been hired at Generic Enterprise. Your colleague Victor Spatz tells you that your new project is going to involve multiplying a lot of complex numbers. The company has an internal linear algebra library with great performance guarantees. Your first task is to do these computations using <span class="underline">only</span> vectors and matrices with standard addition and multiplication.

This is the given problem, but really all you're being asked to do is to find a "representation" function $f$ that takes in a complex number and produces a vector or matrix such that multiplying complex numbers $z_1$ and $z_2$ is the same as multiplying the corresponding vector/matrix representations $Z_1$ and $Z_2$, however you decide to build it using addition and multiplication.

\begin{equation}
\label{eq:prob-setup}
f(z_1 \cdot z_2) = Z_1 \underbrace{\Diamond}_{\text{your operation}} Z_2
\end{equation}

The first observation is that the set of complex numbers $\mathbb{C}$ forms a 2D vector space. A complex number is just a linear combination of the linearly independent vectors $1$ and $i$. So the naive solution is to write a complex number $z = a + bi$ as a column vector $\begin{bmatrix} a & b \end{bmatrix}^\mathsf{T}$, and then to write code to emulate the multiplication operation:

$$
\begin{bmatrix} a \\ b \end{bmatrix} \diamond \begin{bmatrix} c \\ d \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} ac-bd \\ ad+bc \end{bmatrix}
$$

But $\diamond$ can't be written using standard vector operations, since this will require an operation that swaps the real and imaginary parts. The trick is to use a matrix because matrix multiplication lets us operate across rows (and columns). We obviously cannot use a 1x1 matrix because $\mathbb{C}$ is a 2-dimensional space, but a 2x2 matrix has 4 independent components. We will need to make 2 of those dimensions linearly dependent.

The constraints are as follows: 

1. Both 1 and $i$ need a 2x2 matrix representation.
2. 1 and $i$ need to be linearly independent.
3. The representations must only "use" 2 of the 4 entries.
4. We need $i^2 = -1$ to capture the algebra of complex numbers.

Naturally, the identity matrix operates like the number 1.

\begin{equation}
f(1) = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\\\\ 0 & 1\end{bmatrix}.
\end{equation}

We will now need to use the anti-diagonal for $i$. You can verify that squaring the following matrix (by multiplying with itself) gives the matrix for -1.

\begin{equation}
f(i) = \begin{bmatrix} 0 & -1 \\\\\ 1 & 0\end{bmatrix}.
\end{equation}

To summarize, we have the following correspondence.

\begin{equation}
\label{eq:iso}
f(a + bi) = \begin{bmatrix} a & -b \\\\ b & a\end{bmatrix}
\end{equation}
You can now tap into those speedups by just using matrix multiplications.

\begin{equation}
\begin{bmatrix} a & -b \\\\\ b & a\end{bmatrix} \cdot \begin{bmatrix} c &  -d\\\\\ d & c \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} ac-bd & -(ad+bc)\\\\\ ad+bc & ac - bd \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation}

## Groups

We're going to take a brief detour into group theory. It's not too scary:

> A group is any set with an associative, invertible binary operation.


In other words, we have a collection of objects $G$ and a rule $\star: G \times G \to G$ (i.e. combines two elements of $G$ to produce yet another element of $G$). The pair $(G, \star)$ is said to be a group under the $\star$ operation if

* The expression $a \star b \star c$ is unambiguous because it does not matter whether you compute $a \star b$ or $b \star c$ first. This is associativity.
* There is a special neutral element $e$ that has no effect whatsoever: $a \star e \equiv e \star a \equiv a$. 
* Every element $a$ in $G$ has a friend denoted $a^{-1}$ such that $a \star a^{-1} = a^{-1} \star a = e$. This is invertibility.

In general, any collection of objects that has an operation that reminds you of addition or multiplication can be a group (although you may have to exclude the "zero" object so that every element is invertible). Addition and multiplication are typically associative.

* The real numbers form a group $(\mathbb{R}, +)$ under addition. The inverse of $a$ is $-a$ because $a-a=0$ and $a+0 = a$. Pretty simple.
* The real numbers excluding zero form a group $(\mathbb{R} \setminus \\{0\\}, \times)$ under multiplication. The inverse of $a$ is $\frac{1}{a}$ because $a \cdot \frac{1}{a}=1$ and $1a=a$.

For short hand, we can just write a superscript with a times symbol for the multiplication group: $\mathbb{R}^\times$, understood to exclude zero.

The whole impetus for bringing groups up is that the complex numbers excluding zero form a group $\mathbb{C}^\times$ under multiplication and the $n \times n$ invertible matrices form a group under matrix multiplication. We shall denote these groups $\mathbb{C}^\times$ and $\operatorname{GL}(n)$, where GL stands for [general linear group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_linear_group).

## Analogies

Suppose we have two groups, $(G, \flat)$ and $(H, \sharp)$. If we find a function $f: G \to H$ that doesn't care whether we combine inputs on the input side or on the output side, i.e.

$$
f(g_1 \flat g_2) = f(h_1) \sharp f(h_2),
$$

then we can say the function respects the group operations. The existence of such a function is not that interesting: we can always construct such a function, known as a homomorphism,[^hm] by forcing the output to be the identity element $e_H$ in $H$. But, a homomorphism _can_ certainly be very interesting. My favorite example is the determinant! The determinant's signature is

$$
\det: \operatorname{GL}(n)^{\cdot} \to \mathbb{R}^{\times}
$$

We know it's a homomorphism because the determinant has the property that

$$
\det (AB) = \det A \cdot \det B.
$$

Even more interesting than a generic homomorphism is a bijective homomorphism, which means that every element in one of the groups has exactly one analog in the other group in such a way that they operate similarly under their group operations. A bijective homomorphism is called an isomorphism.

Perhaps you're anticipating the punchline now: the mapping in Equation \ref{eq:iso} is actually an isomorphism. We set it up so that every complex number has a matrix representation, but it happens that every valid matrix representation has only one complex number assigned to it. Of course, Equation \ref{eq:prob-setup} enforces the homomorphism property already.

## Matrix Exponentials

We can place a lot of faith in Equation \ref{eq:iso}: it holds up on both the set and group levels. Therefore, we might like to try some more exotic operations with complex numbers and see how they translate in the matrix world. It's not hard to see the translations for conjugation and norms. The real complexity and beauty lies hidden in Euler's remarkable formula:

\begin{equation}
\exp\left({i\theta}\right) = \cos\theta + i \sin\theta \tag{Euler}
\end{equation}

We know how to represent $i\theta$ as a matrix and how to represent $\cos\theta + i \sin\theta$ as a matrix, so let's do that explicitly.

\begin{equation}
\label{eq:skew}
\exp \left({\begin{bmatrix} 0 & -\theta \\\\ \theta & 0\end{bmatrix}}\right) = \begin{bmatrix} \cos\theta  & -\sin\theta \\\\ \sin\theta & \cos\theta \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation}

It looks like we might have just discovered a way to exponentiate a matrix! Recall that the healthy way to think about the exponential function for scalars is 

\begin{equation}
\label{eq:exp-defn}
\exp x \triangleq \sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac{x^k}{k!}.
\end{equation}

We can upgrade Equation \ref{eq:exp-defn} to a matrix equation by simply promoting the operations to matrix operations. Raising a matrix to an integer power is clear and so is scalar multiplication and matrix addition. We might be inclined to check that Equation \ref{eq:skew} agrees with the upgraded Equation \ref{eq:exp-defn}. The calculation is not hard, and you'll find that it checks out.


----

[^hm]: homo=same, morph=form.