---
title: "Reading, Fast and Slow"
tags: [reading]
---

Writing is best understood as a technology. We know that humans invented it, seeing as writing doesn't appear in nature spontaneously. We know that it had its own Luddite opponents, like the Greek philosopher Socrates, who believed it would make people forgetful. We observe that it has evolved over time to become more freely available and that people have been playing with this technology in creative and exciting ways.

If you do not consider yourself a reader, you likely haven't understood the technology yet. There is no shame in that, just like there is no shame in not understanding the technology of a computer. You are simply missing out on a valuable tool, that is all.

Writing is a communication technology that relies on language, which is a rich and comfortable medium for many of us. Rich in that language is just as capable of describing a visceral experience as it is an abstract idea and comfortable in that we've all heard and told stories and explained concepts but also in that literacy is nearly ubiquitous. Consider, by contrast, that a minority of people will ever develop any kind of eye for aesthetics in painting.


### Schooling interfering with education

If you're like me, you learned to read at the typical age, read for fun as a kid, and became increasingly confused with what you were supposed to learn from school textbooks. This is not your fault. Reading is not an innate skill; it must be learned, some people pick it up quicker than others, and you can get better with practice.

Bottom line -- school doesn't teach you how to read. So be it. We can teach ourselves.

### Crash Course on Reading

Let's assume you have a book you want to read in hand. We'll talk about picking a book later.

My advice is based on Mortimer Adler's _How to Read a Book_, a manual for learning to operate your book. Of course, it seems silly to need a manual to read a book, but not if you think of a book as analogous to a computer. It can be operated semi-intuitively, but some theoretical understanding can help you use it better. 

Firstly, a book is a tool that you can use however you like, so don't let anyone tell you what the "right" way to read is, even Adler. Indeed, there's no instruction needed to explain how to read for entertainment. The point is that some books will be left with untapped gems or just plain incomprehensible if you read in an unprincipled way. Let's outline these principles.


**Principle 1:** Reading is the active process of decoding what an author has encoded in symbols using your own mind. 

Principle 1 reminds us that the words on the page are meaningless without somebody to interpret them. It's all too easy to sound out each word without any thought about the connection to the sentence, paragraph, or chapter, so be alert, awake, and active. Taking notes is always a good idea, even if it's just noting down plot for some longer form fiction.

**Principle 2:** Not everything needs to make sense on the first read.

This is where school classes giving you quizzes on minute details in every chapter really messes us up. If something doesn't make sense, just move on. It's either deliberate or it isn't; if it isn't, you will have an easier time making sense of it all when you build up a mental map by finishing the first read. Good books should actually reward you for coming back to them with a keener eye.

**Principle 3:** Books are like stick shift cars compared to videos when it comes to pacing. You have a lot of control, and you must learn to use it well if you are to use it at all.

Unlike movies, where the pace is set for you, you can read a group of sentences as quickly as slowly as you decide, leaving a problem. If you go too fast, you won't have full comprehension. If you go too slow, you lose the forest for the trees. Different books want to be read at different paces, and so it goes for different paragraphs in the same book. This rule you have to figure out on your own with some trial and error.

**Principle 4:** In a non-fiction book, the author has seen something and wants you to see it, too. Their prose is like a glass window, ideally transparent so that you can see the ideas clearly on the other side. Interpret it as such.

**Principle 5:** In a fiction book, the author wants to deliver an experience to you. Their prose, the medium, is part of the message. Assume that the form follows function. Interpret the prose as such.

These are the general tenets of reading I've started to develop, but they will likely develop over time. Adler's book is a great resource to look at to build your own system.
