---
title: "Emergence of Chaos"
published: false
---

> The classification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less is here essayed. -- Herman Meville, _Moby-Dick_

A fox disembowels itself in a lush, distinctive scene of Lars von Trier’s film _Antichrist_ before growling _chaos reigns_. I admit, the scene can feel both cartoony and angsty. And yet, it's correct. This is the story of how I came to terms with chaos philosophically, artistically, and scientifically.

I first got a grasp on the problem reading Albert Camus. I still hold that _The Stranger_ is less convincing than _The Myth of Sisyphus_, which clearly states its terms from the onset: the philosophical problem of suicide. But Camus is in fact dealing with how to make sense of a senseless world. Having seen the disparity between thought and reality, I assented. Yes, the world is absurd because the mind always wants to grasp it, finding only temporary, if any, respite. Yes, suicide doesn't solve the problem in the least, and existing philosophical answers take one‘leap of faith’ or another. But what does life look like once I accept the absurd? Surely I cannot live with no rules and no hope and no meaning. A correction was needed here, but it required connecting the absurd to the chaotic proper.

Enter Ovid’s _Metamorphoses_, a poem weaved out of myths of transformation. Of which Book I opens on Chaos. 

> Before the sea and the lands and the sky which covers everything, there was one face of nature for all in the world, called Chaos: an undeveloped and disordered mass was heaped together, nothing but the inert weight and the discordant seeds of things not well united.

The speaker goes on to say that god or some kinder spirit shapes this chaos. Unlike the _creatio ex nihilo_ of Genesis, _Metamorphoses_ wants us to see, in the words of Heraclitus, _panta rhei_, that everything flows. The changing of the world from a disorderly bundle of mass to sea, land, and sky is the same kind of change as Daphne turning into a tree. All along the cosmic scale, from the universe to humans, the only constant is change, and Ovid even puts his own spin on the Heraclitean formula, _omnia mutantur, nihil interit_; that is, everything changes, nothing perishes.

Ovid’s description is moving, awe-inspiring but otherwise value-neutral. The raw material of chaos does not harm or benefit us, it simply morphs. That is not the only available depiction. In _Paradise Lost_, Milton invokes Chaos too, but it is darker, more sinister. Or you could even take Joker from _The Dark Knight_ as an agent of chaos.

To recap, we have three conceptions of chaos.

1. à la the Absurd, whatever we cannot make sense of (Camus)
2. the reality that matter cannot sit still (Ovid)
3. the malicious, the evil, whatever is actively out to stop progress and order (Milton/Nolan)

Does one precede or subsume the rest? Yes. Ovid got it right, two thousand years ago, and modern science bears him out. I can only give a brief sketch which will not do justice to any of the relevant concepts.

1. Our picture begins with the atom, whose electrons cannot even be said to “be” anywhere. This trippy idea is the work of quantum mechanics, which defies common sense. The position and velocity of a physical object depend on whether they have been observed or not, and we can only give a probabilistic account of the time-evolution of a quantum system.
2. The usefulness of statistics and probability, not only in quantum mechanics but in the sciences generally, speaks to the need for making sense of randomness in the universe. From the physical perspective, it is not possible to make sense of individual atoms or particles in gas, and we have to look one level higher to see any patterns. 
3. The related concept of entropy, roughly a measure of disorder, has also become fundamental. Thermodynamic entropy gives us a way of distinguishing the past from the future: in a closed system, the future will be more disordered. Information entropy uses the same notion to study how communication channels can deal with noise.
4. Surprisingly, even if we eliminate randomness entirely, we can still see the effects of chaos. Chaos theory in mathematics studies how a completely deterministic system can behave in ways that cannot be predicted. 
5. Evolution gives us an account of how life is able to thrive on this chaos. The explanation we get from evolution is one in which the randomness of DNA mutations is an advantage and genetic recombination emerged to create more robust individuals. \[The relationship between evolution and chaos is wonderfully rich and, to my mind, undergirds this entire pet theory. I hope to build out the point more clearly and fully in the future.]

The human emerged from chaos by harnessing it. When humans feel they understand a feature of the world, it becomes a tool. It’s no wonder we would dislike a world alien to reason, or that we fear forces that oppose us without justifiable motive. It robs us of agency.

To acknowledge the primacy of chaos requires significant intellectual retooling. The Renaissance and Enlightenment made great strides in championing human reason, vital in our collective enterprise. But the last century has shown us that we’re not escaping chaos any time soon (frankly, ever). The important systems resist reduction to simple, rational principles. We need to understand something more about **emergence**.

