---
title: "Technology"
---

> technology (n.): any recurrent and productive response to chaos/nature from a living being.

The word technology stirs within us images of engines, equations, and electricity, which all fall under the banner of STEM.

Michel Foucault uses the word differently. In his "Technologies of the Self," he tracks the history of this technology by looking at the phrases “know yourself” and “take care of yourself” as they appear in Greco-Roman philosophy and Christian asceticism. He finds that specific techniques like letter-writing helped people interact with this emerging sense of self. 

Just as the technology of the **calculator** makes arithmetic easier or the technology of the **airplane** makes fast worldwide transportation possible, the technology of the self makes one's thoughts and feelings clearer. Which leads me to believe our standard definition of technology is too restrictive. I'm fine with technology centering around machines, but let's start with biology, where all human stories originate. Evolution is a better engineer than most.

Take one look at the natural world, and you’ll find that it is teeming with technology. Bats use **echolocation**. Angiosperms use **fruits** to transport seeds efficiently. **Human eyes** are, curiously enough, adapted to  identifying snakes and ripe fruits.[^fruit-tree-serpent] 

Adaptations are the quintessential technology. They provide a species, living beings, with a response to some facet of their environment. That response has to be productive, or it would be selected against. It has to be recurrent, or the trait wouldn't be widespread. We ought to see technology, like adaptations, as extensions of our nervous system.[^mcluhan] For a concrete example, **infrared goggles** literally extend the range of our vision. More abstractly, **writing** extends our voice by preserving it on paper.

[^mcluhan]: This viewpoint is an expansion of Marshall McLuhan's idea that media are extensions of man.

We're leaving to one side the mechanism in any given technology, because people do too. You can use a technology without understanding its mechanism. Beer was almost surely discovered by accident, but people found that it solved many --- perhaps too many --- of their problems. You can also use a technology when the mechanism is clear but not particularly relevant. For Martin Heidegger, we see tools like hammers based on how we would use them, not their abstract components. You see the hammer and instinctively think "object for handling nails." 

The insidious case, however, is when the mechanism seems obvious, but people are only mistaking their familiarity for understanding. People think they know how to operate their brain. But meditation is a technology that shows us that this is an illusion. Once we realize how chaotic our thoughts are, we can see that the practice of regularly trying to focus our attention is beneficial. 
 

[^fruit-tree-serpent]: Isbell, Lynne A.. _The Fruit, the Tree, and the Serpent: Why We See So Well_. United States, Harvard University Press, 2009.

To me, the greatest technologies of the human project are **art, philosophy, and science**. They are not a single-use or single-purpose tool for responding to chaos but a perceptual apparatus. The art, philosophy, and science of a community tell us how they make sense of their world. These are our treasured technologies. Learn them, use them well, defend them.

---