---
title: "What I believe in"
---

I just read my friend Sarv's [post](https://sarvasvkulpati.com/blog/believe) of this same name and felt like I needed one of my own as well.

## What do I believe in?

- This is the primary question: [How to Be a Human Being](https://www.allmusic.com/album/how-to-be-a-human-being-mw0002957549). Or even just a being.
- To be a human is to create and to experiment with what life could be (sometimes the creations are monstrous, sometimes glorious). 
- Creation and experimentation requires both theory and practice in the right proportions.
- Most ideas are bad or worthless, what matters is an intuition for which ones are worth trying and the willingness to see those through.
- A rationality that won't acknowledge what it does not know or understand is rigid, inflexible, ultimately doomed.

## What do I like?

- Learning.
- Gray, foggy skies, a hot cup of tea (Earl Grey) in the morning, and a long walk.
- Discovering what a medium (text, film, audio, games, etc.) can do when the creator is clever. 
- Paper books and the classics.
- Sharpie S-Gel Pens.
- Mythology, especially Proto-Indo-European. 
- Literature and philosophy, two sides of the same coin.
- Building things in increments.
- Board games and puzzles (mainly crosswords).
- Food and cooking.
- Concrete concepts divorced from any particular field of specialization.

## What do I think is important?

- We think with the language we use, so the words, idioms, and metaphors we use matter and deserve attention.
- The value and celebration of [[Play]].
- Calibrated uncertainty, i.e. calculated risk.

## Quotes

> What we do may be small, but it has a certain character of permanence; and to have produced anything of the slightest permanent interest, whether it be a copy of verses or a geometrical theorem, is to have done something utterly beyond the powers of the vast majority of men. - Mathematician G.H. Hardy

> I am not a donkey, I don't have a field -- Max Weber

> I am not a thing -- a noun. I seem to be a verb, an evolutionary process -- an integral function of the universe --- Buckminster Fuller

> Do I contradict myself? / Very well then I contradict myself / (I am large, I contain multitudes.) -- Walt Whitman