---
title: "Idols & Ideology"
---

It's not as violent as it seems: _If you meet the Buddha, kill the Buddha_, or so the koan goes. It's not a call to physical violence but a reminder to discover for ourselves rather than follow idols, role models, and figures. I'm convinced that anytime we find ourselves agreeing with a viewpoint too much, there ideology lurks.

I have two examples in mind. The first is Jordan Peterson, whose videos I watched as a teenager when I was seeking, knowingly or not, a comprehensive world view. We'll not spend too much time on this example because this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m81q-ZkfBm0) does a good job of poking through his. 

Like any impressionable young person, I have had idols, role models, figures to look up to. As a teenager, I watched Jordan Peterson videos because he had a world view that had answers to so many questions. More recently, I became interested in Effective Altruism (EA). And yet time proves their imperfection and flaws and then I'm glad that I had a little reservation about following them completely. Looking back, it seems safe to call these patterns ideologies, but that still leaves me susceptible. I want to know how to avoid getting wrapped up in ideology.

For both Peterson and EA, I always had suspicions that they were a little too simple to be true. And it helped that there were resources  and [Notes on Effective Altruism](https://michaelnotebook.com/eanotes/). But Slavoj Zizek's insight is that we actually never escape ideology. 

Part of the question is what counts as evidence. Foucault says every discourse has an episteme. But it helps to try to see past the seduction of the ideology (always easier when you don't agree with it). Example.

EA = Utilitarianism + Longtermism

But you can find critiques of utilitarianism. 


In Nietzsche _Twilight of the Idols_, he attacks Socrates. It's actually not fair to ask people to define their concepts. We're all figuring things out intuitively first and rationally second. 
